In general:
 * These crashes are doing weird things to my monitor.  It's now 
   continually making minute resizes on the horizontal aspect, even 
   though the program is crashed and closed.  There, it just did it 
   again!

In Caverns:
 * Fish in the fountain seem to be abnormally "intelligent" in their
   following patterns.  They get in the way a lot more than I remember
   them doing.
 * The rainbow bridge does not appear when all the gems are collected.
   There is a character change to reflect the gem placement, and a 
   flash of light, but no bridge.

In Demon Earth:
 * Game will often crash on start.  I suspect this may have something 
   to do with the way Nytar forced all four game files to load up the 
   starting world when played, since it seems to work when you play 
   from the world DE_START.  However, this is only conjecture.
 * Fade in after room transition doesn't look right, there is a bright 
   flash of the room before it goes back to dark and fades up.
 * Name selection still doesn't work, and hasn't since 2.69c.  The
   player is always called "Player".  This may be the fault of bad
   coding taking improper advantage of a 2.69b bug.
 * When arriving on Earth, I'm not sure the character set changed 
   correctly; when I went over to the boulders blocking the east passage
   they looked like a type of game enemy, not boulders.
 * Upon touching the boulders, the game crashed to desktop.
 * There is clearly a problem with the status bar that is hard to 
   diagnose.  It appears that it somehow gets uncoupled from tracking 
   energy and health, perhaps on getting a power up.  All I could tell
   was that the numbers were stuck at full (I initially thought 
   something was broken so that I had infinite ammo), but when I kept
   firing shots I eventually drained both my energy and my health and 
   died.
 * Loading an old version's save game (just to check) crashed the 
   program with a "Windowing Code Bug".  I know this isn't supported
   functionality, and didn't expect it to be, but it would be nice if
   it failed gracefully with a "Save game is from a previous version"
   error, instead of a fatal crash.

In Rayne's Jellybean:
 * The game is entirely unplayable, the characters on the game screen 
   are a bunch of garbage, and while the basic shape is apparent by the
   colors, the only legible things are the four answers.
 * I can't tell for sure, but if I remember what the keys are for 
   selecting answers are, then they aren't working, and cause no 
   response.