BUILDING MEGAZEUX

MegaZeux can currently be built for Microsoft Windows, Linux, MacOS X,
OpenBSD, Solaris, GP2X, PSP or NDS. On MacOS X, universal binaries can
be created.

GCC and Microsoft compilers are supported.

On all platforms, the editor, help system, audio, and various renderers
can be disabled to reduce program size or required dependencies.

For architecture specific build instructions please see arch/$ARCH/README

The following instructions are generic for all platforms.

DEPENDENCIES

MegaZeux depends on only three libraries with the most basic configuration.
These are the SDL, ogg and vorbis libraries.

SDL:			http://www.libsdl.org/
libogg/libvorbis:	http://xiph.org/downloads/

Installation of these libraries is not covered in this document, but on
many platforms there are pre-built binaries available. Under Linux, these
libraries will already be installed, but you may want to install the -dev
packages:

libogg-dev, libvorbis-dev, libsdl1.2-dev (Debian/Ubuntu)

MegaZeux has a slew of additional features that have more dependencies.
On X11 platforms, the xorg-dev package should be installed to enable
clipboard support. Additionally libpng can be used on all platforms
to enable PNG (as opposed to BMP) screenshots.

CONFIGURING MEGAZEUX

All platforms must first invoke the config.sh script to configure the
build system. Type "./config.sh" inside a POSIX sh compatible shell
environment (on Windows, install MSYS/MINGW) to get more usage info.

A normal compile line for Windows might be:

./config.sh --platform win32 --disable-libpng

BUILDING MEGAZEUX

Now, you need GNU GCC and GNU make to actually build. Type make and
if you wish to install to ${PREFIX}/bin follow it with make install.

The install target is only supported on Linux. package.sh can be
used to build ZIPs containing binary builds of MegaZeux, and is the
preferred means of distribution. This method is supported on all of
the major desktop platforms (except Linux) and all of the embedded
platforms.

On Debian Linux, DEB files can be generated with a single command.
See debian/README for more information.
